[MUSIC]
In this video, we're going to complete our
data model by relating all our datasets.
And we're also going to start using
that data to perform some analysis.
I've clicked into the Sales by Year tab.
And what we'd like to do here is using our
data in data model, create a pivot table,
showing the total number of
items sold by category and year.
But with the data in the data model,
how do I create a pivot table?
And it's actually really easy.
We're going to come to our Insert tab.
We're going to select pivot table.
And you'll notice that the option
Use this workbook's Data Model is
automatically selected.
This easy to ignore option unlocks
a whole parallel universe in Excel.
We're going to click OK.
Now first thing you'll notice
is instead of just one table,
we have all the tables in our
data model to choose from.
And this is what makes Power Pivot so
powerful that we can pull
data from multiple sources.
When you start working in Power Pivot
you may find it easier to change your
field view.
So I'm coming to the little
cog at the top right.
And I'm going to choose the second option,
which puts the fields section on
the left and the areas on the right.
And that just means I can
see more of my fields.
Now what we want to do is see
our total order item quantity.
So coming to order items,
I'm going to click the drop down.
I can now see all
the fields on their table.
And I need all the quantities.
So I'm just going to select that.
And as expected it's added it to
the values section and added it up.
But I now want to get
the breakdown by product category.
And I don't actually have category
anywhere in my order items table.
So in traditional Excel,
we would use a VLOOKUP or
an index match to pull
that information through.
But in Power Pivot,
we don't need to do that.
We are going to come to
our look up products.
So this is the information
about all our products.
And as well as product ID and Name,
you will see it also has a category.
So we are going to select that.
Now that didn't quite work.
And the reason is at this point there
is no relationship between the lookup
products and our order quantity.
So what it's doing is it's just giving us
each category and the total next to it.
So we have to somehow
connect those data sets.
If you have a look on the right hand side,
you'll see Excel's even suggesting there's
a problem, and
you may need a relationship.
It's even offering to create
that relationship for you.
So we're going to click Auto-Detect And
then just click the Close button,
and you'll see it has
created the relationship.
And now we have a breakdown
of items ordered by category.
Let's go and
have a look at that relationship.
So back into our Power Pivot
ribbon we're going to click
Manage And what we're looking at
at the moment is our data view.
When we want to see our
relationships however,
a better view is the Diagram View.
So on the Home ribbon,
just select Diagram View.
And here's our order items and
our look our products and
you can see it has created
a one to many relationship.
Now to see which fields it has related,
we're going to double click on the line,
double click on that relationship.
And you can see it's actually
linked ProductID to ProductID,
which is exactly what we want.
If it had made a mistake, we could
actually just go and correct it at
this point, but we're going to leave
it as ProductID and then just say OK.
If you wanted to remove the relationship,
you can right click on the line, and
you have the option to delete or edit.
What we want to do now, though,
is create our own relationships.
I mean, that worked really well,
but it's better practice to actually
put the relationships in yourself.
The first thing we're going to
do is reorganize our tables.
At the bottom of the window, I'm going to
click the zoom slider to zoom in a little
bit, and you'll see our calendar tables
actually hanging off the edge there.
So I'm just going to grab that and
pull that across.
And I'm actually going to put it
near the top left hand corner.
And then I'm going to move orders
down a little bit underneath.
The recommended layout for
your data model is to have all
your lookup tables in the top row.
So I'm actually going to move
lookup products up a little bit,
and I'm going to move
the order items down.
And then I'm just going to move these
two across a little bit as well.
So, just pop that in there.
So what we've got is our lookup tables,
the tables that create context for
our data in the top row.
And the fact tables or
the data tables that have all the numbers,
the actual sales transactions.
They are in the bottom row.
And there's two reasons for this.
First of all, think of it as looking up.
So we're going to look up
to see our lookup data.
But more importantly,
if you have a look at the relationship,
it flows if you like,
from the one to the many.
And that has implications for
when we start filtering the data.
I can filter my order items by any
of the fields in my lookup products,
because that's the direction
of the relationship.
It doesn't automatically
work the other way around.
So I can't filter my lookup products
by values in my order items.
And that's why it's quite important
to get this structure right.
All right,
let's add some more relationships.
So one order could potentially
have many order items and
the field that will allow us
to relate these two tables,
the matching field is our sales order ID.
This is also called the primary key.
Now, we're going to start in the ones.
We're going to start in the Orders.
Click on SalesOrderID and
drag to SalesOrderID in the Order_Items.
And that creates a one
to many relationship.
Now I have a lot of other
relationships on Orders.
If you need to make the table a little
bigger, you can come to the bottom of it
and just click and drag down so
we can see the rest of the fields.
Now I also want to be able to see
which customer bought the item.
In this case,
I'm going to match the ID in the customer
table to the customer ID in my orders.
So repeating the process we're
going to click ID drag and
hook it on to CustomerID.
Let's do the same for our sales person.
So, from Staff,
I'm going to grab EmployeeID and
I'm going to link that to SalesPersonID.
And, finally, I'm going to grab Date in
my Calendar and link that to OrderDate.
We have now completed our data model
by putting in the relationships.
And we can now create pivot tables that
pull data from any of these sources.
Let's go and test it out.
We don't actually have to
close our pivot window,
you can just press Alt Tab to
jump back into the spreadsheet.
And what we want to do now
is add out year information.
So coming to our pivot field list,
I'm going to expand the Calendar.
And you'll see I can either go to
Date Hierarchy or More Fields.
The Date Hierarchy was added for
us automatically and
we're going to look at hierarchies
more in the next video.
But what it allows us to do is basically
add a hierarchy rather than just
a single field.
So let's see how it works.
I'm going to select hierarchy and
drop it into Columns.
And you'll see it's added each of
the years, but I can actually expand
2018 to see it by month, and
I could expand March to see it by day.
So these hierarchies offer
you the ability to expand and
collapse fields within the pivot.
It's a little bit like a grouping,
but without the same limitations.
So what we've seen in this video
is how we can start creating
pivot tables using fields
from multiple different data
sets without needing to actually
use VLOOKUPS or index match.
This is probably one of the most
important reasons for using Power Pivot.
But there are a lot of other advantages,
and
we're going to start looking at
some of those in the next video.